---
layout: post
title: "Why write?"
---

At the start of *Breaking Bad* Walter is faced with a tricky situation. He
managed to escape a murder attempt from a drug dealer and captured him in the
process. But what to do now? Walter doesn't want to kill anyone, but just
letting this person go might not be a good idea either.

So Walter writes a list with the points in favour of "let him live" and "kill
him".

<div class="border-img center-img"><img alt="The list" src="{% base64 ./_images/writing.jpeg %}"></div>

The reason Walter wrote a list is because he wasn't sure *what* to think and
wanted to *order his thoughts*.

And this, for me, is the greatest value in writing things down. While I've
published very little of it, I've written about 100 articles in the last few
years on a wide range of topics. I never seem to *quite* get around to finishing
them, although I hope I will do in the future (this article has been in "draft"
for over a year!) the primary reason isn't for other people to read what I
write, it's to order and articulate my own thoughts.

A second reason is that writing is a hugely important skill. It's the process of
conveying an idea of head A to head B. Too often do I see people – including
myself – explain their thoughts poorly, causing confusion and unnecessarily long
discussions at best, or getting dismissed only because of the poor
explanation/writing at worst.

It's a skill, and like all skills it needs practice to improve. Musicians don't
learn their skills by giving concerts, they learn by practising at home. And
that's what my 100 unpublished drafts are: practice. I'll probably publish a
bunch of them (...eventually...), but I won't publish all. Sometimes it turned
out that I was just wrong, or it turns out that the matter is more complex than
I thought. Either way, it was still good practice, and in the process I usually
manage to learn a thing or two about the topic at hand.

And finally, yes, of course it's nice when people actually read what you wrote
and add (hopefully positive!) feedback. I never did anything to promote any of
my articles, but a number of them somehow ended up being quoted in various
places, and people have sent me emails and the like thanking me.

This is also the reason I answer questions on Stack Overflow and its sister
sites. When I started on the [Vi and
Vim](https://vi.stackexchange.com/users/51/carpetsmoker) site I didn't actually
know all that much about Vim; I learned much of it by researching and answering
questions from other users.
